What decides whether a sum of money is good? The money is not
going to tell you; it must be the faculty that makes use of such
impressions – reason.
Discourses I, 1.5
Being attached to many things, we are weighed down and dragged
along with them.
Discourses I, 1.15
What should we do then? Make the best use of what is in our power,
and treat the rest in accordance with its nature.
Discourses I, 1.17
What should we have ready at hand in a situation like this? The
knowledge of what is mine and what is not mine, what I can and
cannot do.
Discourses I, 1.21
‘I will throw you into prison.’ ‘Correction – it is my body you will
throw there.’
Discourses I, 1.24
I have to die. If it is now, well then I die now; if later, then now I
will take my lunch, since the hour for lunch has arrived – and dying
I will tend to later.
Discourses I, 1.32
Education has no goal more important than bringing our
preconception of what is reasonable and unreasonable in alignment
with nature.
Discourses I, 2.6
Consider at what price you sell your integrity; but please, for God’s
sake, don’t sell it cheap.
Discourses I, 2.33
What is the goal of virtue, after all, except a life that flows
smoothly?
Discourses I, 4.5
If from the moment they get up in the morning they adhere to their
ideals, eating and bathing like a person of integrity, putting their
principles into practice in every situation they face – the way a
runner does when he applies the principles of running, or a singer
those of musicianship – that is where you will see true progress
embodied, and find someone who has not wasted their time making
the journey here from home.
Discourses I, 4.20
What else are tragedies but the ordeals of people who have come to
value externals, tricked out in tragic verse?
Discourses I, 4.26
If a man objects to truths that are all too evident, it is no easy task
finding arguments that will change his mind. This is proof neither of
his own strength nor of his teacher’s weakness. When someone
caught in an argument hardens to stone, there is just no more
reasoning with them.
Discourses I, 5.1
Most of us dread the deadening of the body and will do anything to
avoid it. About the deadening of the soul, however, we don’t care
one iota.
Discourses I, 5.4
We pity the mentally retarded, and students with learning
difficulties. But if somebody’s sense of shame and respect are dead,
we will actually call this determination.
Discourses I, 5.5
And so it is inexcusable for man to begin and end where the beasts
do. He should begin where they do, but only end where nature left
off dealing with him; which is to say, in contemplation and
understanding.
Discourses I, 6.20
“But my nose is running!” What do you have hands for, idiot, if not
to wipe it? “But how is it right that there be running noses in the
first place?” Instead of thinking up protests, wouldn’t it be easier
just to wipe your nose?
Discourses I, 6.30
For what does reason purport to do? “Establish what is true,
eliminate what is false and suspend judgement in doubtful cases.”
… What else does reason prescribe? “To accept the consequence of
what has been admitted to be correct.”
Discourses I, 7.5
Why are we still lazy, indifferent and dull? Why do we look for
excuses to avoid training and exercising our powers of reason?
“Look, if I err in such matters I haven’t killed my father, have I?”
No, fool – for there was no father there for you to kill! What did you
do instead? You made the only mistake you had the opportunity to
make.
Discourses I, 7.30
Source: Discourses and Selected Writings
translated by Robert Dobbin
Penguin Classics
1
I mean, are these the only crimes, killing your father and burning
down the Capitol? But to use one’s impressions recklessly,
carelessly and at random, to fail to analyse an argument as either
valid proof or fallacy, and, in a word, to fail to see in the act of
question and answer what agrees with your position and what
conflicts – is nothing wrong in all of that?
Discourses I, 7.33
Don’t confuse qualities that are found in the same writer only
incidentally. If Plato had been strong and handsome, should I also
try to become strong and handsome, as if this were essential to
philosophy, since there was one particular philosopher who
combined philosophy with good looks?
Discourses I, 8.12-13
Ask me what the real good in man’s case is, and I can only say that
it is the right kind of moral character.
Discourses I, 8.16
Do as Socrates did, never replying to the question of where he was
from with, ‘I am Athenian,’ or ‘I am from Corinth,’ but always, ‘I
am a citizen of the world.’
Discourses, I, 9.1
Really, such a person amounts to no more than a carcass and a little
blood. If he were anything more, he would realize that no one is
ever unhappy because of someone else.
Discourses I, 9.34
It isn’t death, pain, exile or anything else you care to mention that
accounts for the way we act, only our opinion about death, pain and
the rest.
Discourses I, 11.33
We, not externals, are the masters of our judgements. Discourses I, 11.37
Socrates was not in prison, because he chose to be there. Discourses I, 12.23
You ought to realize, you take up very little space in the world as a
whole – your body, that is; in reason, however, you yield to no one,
not even to the gods, because reason is not measured in size but
sense. So why not care for that side of you, where you and the gods
are equals?
Discourses I, 12.26-27
If you have been placed in a position above others, are you
automatically going to behave like a despot? Remember who you
are and whom you govern – that they are kinsmen, brothers by
nature, fellow descendants of Zeus.
Discourses I, 13.4
You can process in your intellect and senses a wealth of thoughts
and impressions simultaneously. There are impressions that you
assent to, others that you reject; sometimes you suspend judgement
altogether.
Discourses I, 13.7
Nothing important comes into being overnight; even grapes or figs
need time to ripen. If you say that you want a fig now, I will tell you
to be patient. First, you must allow the tree to flower, then put forth
fruit; then you have to wait until the fruit is ripe. So if the fruit of a
fig tree is not brought to maturity instantly or in an hour, how do
you expect the human mind to come to fruition, so quickly and
easily?
Discourses I, 15.7-8
Since reason is what analyses and coordinates everything, it should
not go itself unanalysed. Then what will it be analysed by?
Obviously by itself or something different. Now, this something
different must either be reason or something superior to reason –
which is impossible, since there is nothing superior to reason.
Discourses I, 17.1-2
Which, I suppose, is why Stoics put logic at the head of our
curriculum – for the same reason that, before a quantity of grain can
be measured, we must settle on a standard of measurement.
Discourses I, 17.6
‘What about if someone threatens me with death, though; surely he
compels me then?’ It isn’t what you’re threatened with – it’s the fact
that you prefer to do anything rather than die. It’s your set of values
that compelled you: will acting on will.
Discourses I, 17.25-26
We use labels like ‘thief’ and ‘robber’ in connection with them, but
what do these words mean? They merely signify that people are
confused about what is good and what is bad. So should we be
angry with them, or should we pity them instead?
Discourses I, 18.3
‘But the tyrant will chain –’ What will he chain? Your leg. ‘He will
chop off –’ What? Your head. What he will never chain or chop off
is your integrity.
Discourses I, 18.17
Quote Source
2
We should discipline ourselves in small things, and from there
progress to things of greater value. If you have a headache, practise
not cursing. Don’t curse every time you have an earache. And I’m
not saying that you can’t complain, only don’t complain with your
whole being.
Discourses I, 18.18-19
‘But I get to wear a crown of gold.’ If you have your heart set on
wearing crowns, why not make one out of roses – you will look
even more elegant in that.
Discourses I, 19.29
If you want to know just how little concerned you are about things
good and bad, and how serious about things indifferent, compare
your attitude to going blind with your attitude about being mentally
in the dark. You will realize, I think, how inappropriate your values
really are.
Discourses I, 20.12
When someone is properly grounded in life, they shouldn’t have to
look outside themselves for approval.
Discourses I, 21.1
Who exactly are these people that you want to be admired by?
Aren’t they the same people you are in the habit of calling crazy?
And is this your life ambition, then – to win the approval of
lunatics?
Discourses I, 21.4
Jews, Syrians, Egyptians and Romans. They don’t dispute that what
is holy should be preferred above everything else and in every case
pursued; but they argue, for example, over whether it is holy or
unholy to eat pork.
Discourses I, 22, 4
The operations of the will are in our power; not in our power are the
body, the body’s parts, property, parents, siblings, children, country
or friends.
Discourses I, 22.10
The true man is revealed in difficult times. So when trouble comes,
think of yourself as a wrestler whom God, like a trainer, has paired
with a tough young buck. For what purpose? To turn you into
Olympic-class material. But this is going to take some sweat to
accomplish.
Discourses I, 24.1-2
Death, [Diogenes] said, was not evil because it was not
dishonourable. Reputation was the empty noise of fools.
Discourses I, 24.6
Don’t believe your situation is genuinely bad – no one can make
you do that. Is there smoke in the house? If it’s not suffocating, I
will stay indoors; if it proves too much, I’ll leave. Always remember
– the door is open.
Discourses I, 25.17-18
Remember that it is we who torment, we who make difficulties for
ourselves – that is, our opinions do. What, for instance, does it mean
to be insulted? Stand by a rock and insult it, and what have you
accomplished? If someone responds to insult like a rock, what has
the abuser gained with his invective?
Discourses I, 25.28-29
This, then, is the beginning of philosophy – an awareness of one’s
own mental fitness.
Discourses I, 26.15
Death is necessary and cannot be avoided. I mean, where am I going
to go to get away from it?
Discourses I, 27.7-8
I cannot escape death, but at least I can escape the fear of it. Discourses I, 27.9-10
Passions stem from frustrated desire. Discourses I, 27.10
You Sceptics, who dismiss the evidence of the senses – do you act
any differently? Which one of you ever went to the mill when you
were in need of a bath?
Discourses I, 27.19
When someone assents to a false proposition, be sure that they did
not want to give their assent, since, as Plato says, ‘Every soul is
deprived of the truth against its will.’ They simply mistook for true
something false.
Discourses I, 28.4-5
The essence of good and evil consists in the condition of our
character. And externals are the means by which our character finds
its particular good and evil.
Discourses I, 29.1-2
Correct judgements about externals make our character good, as
perverse or distorted ones make it bad.
Discourses I, 29.3
Quote Source
3
This is how I came to lose my lamp: the thief was better than I am in
staying awake. But he acquired the lamp at a price: he became a
thief for its sake, for its sake, he lost his ability to be trusted, for a
lamp he became a brute. And he imagined he came out ahead!
Discourses I, 29.21
If you didn’t learn these things in order to demonstrate them in
practice, what did you learn them for?
Discourses I, 29.35
Anyone who affirms that, in a circle, lines that extend from the
centre to the circumference can be unequal is not going to win the
respect of mathematicians. So – a true philosopher is under no
obligation to respect vulgar opinion as to what is religious or
irreligious, what is just or unjust.
Discourses I, 29.53-54
‘Define for me now what the “indifferents” are.’ ‘Whatever things
we cannot control.’‘Tell me the upshot.’ ‘They are nothing to me.’
Discourses I, 30.3
Death and pain are not frightening, it’s the fear of pain and death we
need to fear. Which is why we praise the poet who wrote, ‘Death is
not fearful, but dying like a coward is.’
Discourses II, 1.13
Pain too is just a scary mask: look under it and you will see. The
body sometimes suffers, but relief is never far behind. And if that
isn’t good enough for you, the door stands open; otherwise put up
with it. The door needs to stay open whatever the circumstances,
with the result that our problems disappear.
Discourses II, 1.19
The masses are wrong to say that only freeborn men are entitled to
an education; believe the philosophers instead, who say that only
educated people are entitled to be called free.
Discourses II, 1.22
If you want to be a man of honour and a man of your word, who is
going to stop you? You say you don’t want to be obstructed or
forced to do something against your will – well, who is going to
force you to desire things that you don’t approve, or dislike
something against your better judgement?
Discourses II, 2.4
Whenever externals are more important to you than your own
integrity, then be prepared to serve them the remainder of your life.
Discourses II, 2.12
We know how to analyse arguments, and have the skill a person
needs to evaluate competent logicians. But in life what do I do?
What today I say is good tomorrow I will swear is bad. And the
reason is that, compared to what I know about syllogisms, my
knowledge and experience of life fall far behind.
Discourses II, 3.4-5
What are we really doing when we throw away our innate
faithfulness, to intrigue with our neighbour’s wife? We are ruining
and destroying – well, what? How about the man of trust, principle
and piety that once was? And is that all? Aren’t we also ruining the
idea of neighbourliness, friendship and community? What position
are we putting ourselves in? How am I supposed to deal with you
now? As a neighbour? A friend? Some friend! A fellow citizen? But
how can a fellow citizen like you be trusted?
Discourses II, 4.2-3
Material things per se are indifferent, but the use we make of them
is not indifferent.
Discourses II, 5.1
Getting those things is not in my control – and not good or bad in
any case. But the way I use them is good or bad, and depends on
me.
Discourses II, 5.8
It’s something like going on an ocean voyage. What can I do? Pick
the captain, the boat, the date, and the best time to sail. But then a
storm hits. Well, it’s no longer my business; I have done everything
I could. It’s somebody else’s problem now – namely the captain’s.
But then the boat actually begins to sink. What are my options? I do
the only thing I am in a position to do, drown – but fearlessly,
without bawling or crying out to God, because I know that what is
born must also die.
Discourses II, 5.10-12
To be sure, external things of whatever kind require skill in their
use, but we must not grow attached to them; whatever they are, they
should only serve for us to show how skilled we are in our handling
of them.
Discourses II, 5.21
Quote Source
4
What are you? A human being. If you think of yourself as a unit
apart, then it is in accordance with your nature to live to old age, to
be rich, and be healthy. But if your view of yourself involves being
part of a whole, then, for the sake of the whole, circumstances may
make it right for you to be sick, go on a dangerous journey, endure
poverty, even die before your time.
Discourses II, 5.25
Because what is a human being? Part of a community – the
community of gods and men, primarily, and secondarily that of the
city we happen to inhabit, which is only a microcosm of the
universe in toto.
Discourses II, 5.26
So when you hear that even life and the like are indifferent, don’t
become apathetic; and by the same token, when you’re advised to
care about them, don’t become superficial and conceive a passion
for externals.
Discourses II, 6.2
Because we’re the only animals who not only die but are conscious
of it even while it happens, we are beset by anxiety.
Discourses II, 6.14
‘My God, what if I’m sent to Gyara?’ Well, if that’s tolerable for
you, you will go; if not, you have the choice of another destination,
the place even the person who sent you to Gyara is headed, whether
they like it or not.
Discourses II, 6.22
You think I can listen to poetry in my position?’ ‘Why, what is it?’
‘I’m sentenced to death!’ ‘And the rest of us aren’t?’
Discourses II, 6, 27
Since plants do not even have the power of perception, ‘good’ and
‘evil’ are not applicable to them. Evidently, ‘good’ and ‘bad’
presume the power of using impressions.
Discourses II, 8.4
A will that never fails to get what it wants, a faculty of aversion that
always avoids what it dislikes, proper impulse, careful purpose and
disciplined assent. That’s the human specimen you should prepare
yourselves to see.
Discourses II, 8.29
Never get into family fights over material things; give them up
willingly, and your moral standing will increase in proportion.
Discourses II, 10.8
Reflect on the other social roles you play. If you are a council
member, consider what a council member should do. If you are
young, what does being young mean, if you are old, what does age
imply, if you are a father, what does fatherhood entail? Each of our
titles, when reflected upon, suggests the acts appropriate to it.
Discourses II, 10.10
If you lost the capacity to read, or play music, you would think it
was a disaster, but you think nothing of losing the capacity to be
honest, decent and civilized.
Discourses II, 10.15
If money is your only standard, then consider that, by your lights,
someone who loses their nose does not suffer any harm.
Discourses II, 10.20
If ‘good’ as well as ‘bad’ really relate to our choices, then consider
whether your position does not amount to saying something like,
‘Well, since that guy hurt himself with the injustice he did me,
shouldn’t I wrong him in order to hurt myself in retaliation?’
Discourses II, 10.25-26
‘Well, whatever you may say, I know good from bad, and have an
idea of the good.’ You have one, I allow. ‘And I put it into practice.’
You use it in specific instances, yes. ‘And I use it correctly.’ Well,
that’s the crux, because this is where opinions become an issue.
Discourses II, 11.7-8
Here you have philosophy’s starting point: we find that people
cannot agree among themselves, and we go in search of the source
of their disagreement.
Discourses II, 11.13
Something good should be a source of pride, correct? ‘Yes.’ And can
one really take pride in a momentary pleasure? Please don’t say yes.
Discourses II, 11.22
When a guide meets up with someone who is lost, ordinarily his
reaction is to direct him on the right path, not mock or malign him,
then turn on his heel and walk away. As for you, lead someone to
the truth and you will find that he can follow. But as long as you
don’t point it out to him, don’t make fun of him; be aware of what
you need to work on instead.
Discourses II, 12.3-4
Quote Source
5
That is what Socrates would do: he would quit only after he had
fleshed out an idea and explored its implications. He wouldn’t just
say, ‘Define envy for me,’ then, when his discourses interlocutor had
ventured on a definition, say, ‘Wrong: your definiens is not
extensionally equivalent to the definiendum.’
Discourses II, 12.9
Now that is the first thing Socrates was known for – never turning
dialogue into dispute, never introducing rudeness or invective,
although he would put up with the insults of others in order to avoid
a fight.
Discourses II, 12.14
At this point you run the risk of him saying, ‘What business is that
of yours, sir? What are you to me?’ Pester him further, and he is
liable to punch you in the nose. I myself was once keen for this sort
of discourse, until I met with just such a reception.
Discourses II, 12.24-25
Take a lyre player: he’s relaxed when he performs alone, but put him
in front of an audience, and it’s a different story, no matter how
beautiful his voice or how well he plays the instrument. Why?
Because he not only wants to perform well, he wants to be well
received – and the latter lies outside his control.
Discourses II, 13.2
It was Antigonus who was anxious before their meeting. Naturally –
he wanted to make a good impression, which was beyond his
control. Zeno, for his part, had no wish to please the king; no expert
needs validation from an amateur.
Discourses II, 13, 15
Becoming a carpenter or pilot, we realize, requires some formal
training. Is it unreasonable to suppose that it will take more than just
the desire to be good or bad – that the student of philosophy will
also have to learn a few things of his own?
Discourses II, 14.10
And yet I won’t have done you any harm – any more than a mirror
is to blame when it shows a plain person what they look like; or a
doctor is mean if he tells a patient, ‘Look, you may think this is
insignificant, but you’re really sick; no food for you today, only
water.’ No one thinks, ‘How rude!’ But say to someone, ‘Your
desires are unhealthy, your powers of aversion are weak, your plans
are incoherent, your impulses are at odds with nature and your
system of values is false and confused,’ – and off they go alleging
slander.
Discourses II, 14.21-22
‘But we must stick with a decision.’ ‘For heaven’s sake, man, that
rule only applies to sound decisions. I suppose next you will decide
that it is night now, and refuse to change your mind because you
don’t want to.
Discourses II, 15.7
‘A fool cannot be convinced or even compelled to renounce his
folly.’ God save me from fools with a little philosophy – no one is
more difficult to reach.
Discourses II, 15.13-14
Where does the good lie? ‘In the will.’ And evil? ‘Also in the will.’
And things neither good nor bad – ‘… lie in whatever is external to
the will.’
Discourses II, 16.1
You might as well get on your knees and pray that your nose won’t
run. A better idea would be to wipe your nose and forgo the prayer.
The point is, isn’t there anything God gave you for your present
problem? You have the gifts of courage, fortitude and endurance.
With ‘hands’ like these, do you still need somebody to help wipe
your nose?
Discourses II, 16.13-14
Show me one person who cares how they act, someone for whom
success is less important than the manner in which it is achieved.
While out walking, who gives any thought to the act of walking
itself? Who pays attention to the process of planning, not just the
outcome?
Discourses II, 16.15
The first thing a pretender to philosophy must do is get rid of their
presuppositions; a person is not going to undertake to learn anything
that they think they already know.
Discourses II, 17.1
This presumption that you possess knowledge of any use has to be
dropped before you approach philosophy – just as if we were
enrolling in a school of music or mathematics.
Discourses II, 17.39
Quote Source
6
If you like doing something, do it regularly; if you don’t like doing
something, make a habit of doing something different. The same
goes for moral inclinations. When you get angry, you should know
that you aren’t guilty of an isolated lapse, you’ve encouraged a trend
and thrown fuel on the fire.
Discourses II, 18.4-5
If you don’t want to be cantankerous, don’t feed your temper, or
multiply incidents of anger. Suppress the first impulse to be angry,
then begin to count the days on which you don’t get mad.
Discourses II, 18.12
It will even do to socialize with men of good character, in order to
model your life on theirs, whether you choose someone living or
someone from the past.
Discourses II, 18.21
Don’t let the force of the impression when first it hits you knock you
off your feet; just say to it, ‘Hold on a moment; let me see who you
are and what you represent. Let me put you to the test.’
Discourses II, 18.24
Today people care only for academic discussion, nothing beyond
that. But I’m presenting to you the real athlete, namely the one
training to face off against the most formidable of impressions.
Discourses II, 18.26-27
Show me someone untroubled with disturbing thoughts about
illness, danger, death, exile or loss of reputation. By all the gods, I
want to see a Stoic!
Discourses II, 19.24
Even people who deny that statements can be valid or impressions
clear are obliged to make use of both. You might almost say that
nothing proves the validity of a statement more than finding
someone forced to use it while at the same time denying that it is
sound.
Discourses II, 20.1
A vine cannot behave olively, nor an olive tree vinely – it is
impossible, inconceivable. No more can a human being wholly
efface his native disposition.
Discourses II, 20.18-19
What illusion about myself do I entertain? Discourses II, 21.9
Don’t be disappointed if you return home with the very same set of
ideas you arrived with. Because you had no intention of changing,
correcting or adopting others in their place.
Discourses II, 21.16
You say the speculative topics are useless. Useless to whom? Only
to people who don’t use them as they should. I mean, salves and
ointments are not useless to people who apply them when and how
they’re supposed to; weights are not useless in themselves, they’re
useful to some people, worthless to others.
Discourses II, 21.20
If someone is incapable of distinguishing good things from bad and
neutral things from either – well, how could such a person be
capable of love? The power to love, then, belongs only to the wise
man.
Discourses II, 22.3
You’re subject to sorrow, fear, jealousy, anger and inconsistency.
That’s the real reason you should admit that you are not wise.
Discourses II, 22.6
No doubt you have seen dogs playing with, and fawning before,
each other, and thought, ‘Nothing could be friendlier.’ But just
throw some meat in the middle, and then you’ll know what
friendship amounts to.
Discourses II, 22.9
Paris was Menelaus’ guest, and anyone who saw how well they
treated each other would have laughed at anyone who said they
weren’t friends. But between the two a bit of temptation was thrown
in the form of a beautiful woman, and over that there arose war.
Discourses II, 22.23
Just ask whether they put their self-interest in externals or in moral
choice. If it’s in externals, you cannot call them friends, any more
than you can call them trustworthy, consistent, courageous or free.
Discourses II, 22.26-27
For where else is friendship found if not with fairness, reliability
and respect for virtue only?
Discourses II, 22.30
[Treat] unenlightened souls with sympathy and indulgence,
remembering that they are ignorant or mistaken about what’s most
important. Never be harsh, remember Plato’s dictum: ‘Every soul is
deprived of the truth against its will.’
Discourses II, 22.36
Quote Source
7
An eye, when open, has no option but to see. The decision whether
to look at a particular man’s wife, however, and how, belongs to the
will. And the determination whether to trust what someone says, and
then, if we trust them, whether we should be angered by it – that
also belongs to the will.
Discourses II, 23.11-13
People act like a traveller headed for home who stops at an inn and,
finding it comfortable, decides to remain there. You’ve lost sight of
your goal, man. You were supposed to drive through the inn, not
park there.
Discourses II, 23.36-37
Some students [of philosophy] become captivated by all these things
and don’t want to proceed further. One is captivated by diction,
another by deductive or equivocal arguments, someone else by yet
another ‘inn’ of this kind; and there they stay and rot as if seduced
by the Sirens.
Discourses II, 23.41
When I see that one thing [virtue] is supreme and most important, I
cannot say that something else is, just to make you happy.
Discourses II, 23.47
The body is the raw material of the doctor and physical therapist.
Land is the farmer’s raw material. The raw material of the good man
is his mind – his goal being to respond to impressions the way
nature intended.
Discourses III, 3.1
What, after all, are sighing and crying, except opinions? What is
‘misfortune’? An opinion. And sectarian strife, dissension, blame
and accusation, ranting and raving – they all are mere opinion, the
opinion that good and bad lie outside us.
Discourses III, 3.18-19
Speaking for myself, I hope death overtakes me when I’m occupied
solely with the care of my character, in an effort to make it
passionless, free, unrestricted and unrestrained.
Discourses III, 5.7
What does Socrates say? ‘One person likes tending to his farm,
another to his horse; I like to daily monitor my self-improvement.’
Discourses III, 5.14
Keep well out of the sun, then, so long as your principles are as
pliant as wax.
Discourses III, 16.10
‘Being healthy is good, being sick is bad.’ No, my friend: enjoying
health in the right way is good; making bad use of your health is
bad.
Discourses III, 20.4
For God’s sake, stop honouring externals, quit turning yourself into
the tool of mere matter, or of people who can supply you or deny
you those material things.
Discourses III, 20.8
A boxer derives the greatest advantage from his sparring partner –
and my accuser is my sparring partner. He trains me in patience,
civility and even temper.
Discourses III, 20.9
I have a bad neighbour – bad, that is, for himself. For me, though,
he is good: he exercises my powers of fairness and sociability.
Discourses III, 20.11
My mind represents for me my medium – like wood to a carpenter,
or leather to a shoemaker. The goal in my case is the correct use of
impressions.
Discourses III, 20.20
Look, can you be forced to assent to what appears to you wrong?’
‘No.’ ‘Or to dissent from the plain truth?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then you see you
do have within you a share of freedom.’
Discourses III, 22.42
All our efforts must be directed towards an end, or we will act in
vain. If it is not the right end, we will fail utterly.
Discourses III, 23.3
Do you want to know if you are educated? Show us your values,
philosopher.
Discourses III, 23.9
He’s a clever young man and a fan of rhetoric.’ ‘How do you know?’
‘He praises me.’ Oh, well, that proves it, of course.
Discourses III, 23.14
Understand what words you use first, then use them. Discourses III, 23.18
Friends, the school of a philosopher is a hospital. When you leave,
you should have suffered, not enjoyed yourself.
Discourses III, 23.30
Who wants to live with delusion and prejudice, being unjust,
undisciplined, mean and ungrateful? ‘No one.’ No bad person, then,
lives the way he wants, and no bad man is free.
Discourses IV, 1.2
Quote Source
8
So you admit that you have at least one master. And don’t let the
fact that Caesar rules over everyone, as you say, console you: it only
means that you’re a slave in a very large household.
Discourses IV, 1.13
‘Do we have that many masters?’ We do. Because over and above
the rest we have masters in the form of circumstances, which are
legion. And anyone who controls any one of them controls us as
well.
Discourses IV, 1.59
What makes for freedom and fluency in the practice of writing?
Knowledge of how to write. The same goes for the practice of
playing an instrument. It follows that, in the conduct of life, there
must be a science to living well.
Discourses IV, 1.63
But suppose I choose to walk, and someone obstructs me?’ What
part of you will they obstruct? Certainly not your power of assent?
‘No, my body.’ Your body, yes – as they might obstruct a rock.
‘Perhaps; but the upshot is, now I’m not allowed to walk.’ Whoever
told you, ‘Walking is your irrevocable privilege’? I said only that
the will to walk could not be obstructed.
Discourses IV, 1.72-73
A plant or animal fares poorly when it acts contrary to its nature;
and a human being is no different. Well, then, biting, kicking,
wanton imprisonment and beheading – is that what our nature
entails? No; rather, acts of kindness, cooperation and good will. And
so, whether you like it or not, a person fares poorly whenever he
acts like an insensitive brute.
Discourses IV, 1.121-122
People to whom such things are still denied come to imagine that
everything good will be theirs if only they could acquire them. Then
they get them: and their longing is unchanged, their anxiety is
unchanged, their disgust is no less, and they still long for whatever
is lacking. Freedom is not achieved by satisfying desire, but by
eliminating it.
Discourses IV, 1.174-175
Formerly, when you were devoted to worthless pursuits, your
friends found you congenial company. But you can’t be a hit in both
roles. To the extent you cultivate one you will fall short in the other.
Discourses IV, 2.6-7
If you forfeit an external possession, make sure to notice what you
get in return. If it is something more valuable, never say, ‘I have
suffered a loss.’
Discourses IV, 3.1
Very little is needed for everything to be upset and ruined, only a
slight lapse in reason. It’s much easier for a mariner to wreck his
ship than it is for him to keep it sailing safely; all he has to do is
head a little more upwind and disaster is instantaneous. In fact, he
does not have to do anything: a momentary loss of attention will
produce the same result.
Discourses IV, 3.4-5
The more we value things outside our control, the less control we
have.
Discourses IV, 4.23
Either you’re going to be depressed when your wish is not realized
or foolishly pleased with yourself if it is, overjoyed for the wrong
reasons.
Discourses IV, 4.35
Just prove to me that you are trustworthy, high-minded and reliable,
and that your intentions are benign – prove to me that your jar
doesn’t have a hole in it – and you’ll find that I won’t even wait for
you to open your heart to me, I’ll be the first to implore you to lend
an ear to my own affairs.
Discourses IV, 13.15
If we try to adapt our mind to the regular sequence of changes and
accept the inevitable with good grace, our life will proceed quite
smoothly and harmoniously.
Fragments 8
Impressions (which philosophers call), striking a person’s mind as
soon as he perceives something within range of his senses, are not
voluntary or subject to his will, they impose themselves on people’s
attention almost with a will of their own. But the act of assent
(which they call) which endorses these impressions is voluntary and
a function of the human will.
Fragments 9
Most apparent philosophers were philosophers not in their actions,
only their words.
Fragments 10
There were two vices much blacker and more serious than the rest:
lack of persistence and lack of self-control … persist and resist.
Fragments 10
Quote Source
9
I say that virtue is more valuable than wealth to the same degree that
eyes are more valuable than fingernails.
Fragments 13
I blush deeply whenever I catch myself saying anything disgraceful.
It’s this reflex that will not allow me to propose pleasure as the good
and the goal of life.
Fragments 14
It is just charming how people boast about qualities beyond their
control. For instance, ‘I am better than you because I have many
estates, while you are practically starving’; or, ‘I’m a consul,’ ‘I’m a
governor,’ or ‘I have fine curly hair.’
Fragments 18
People who are physically ill are unhappy with a doctor who doesn’t
give them advice, because they think he has given up on them.
Shouldn’t we feel the same towards a philosopher – and assume that
he has given up hope of our ever becoming rational – if he will no
longer tell us what we need (but may not like) to hear?
Fragments 19
People with a strong physical constitution can tolerate extremes of
hot and cold; people of strong mental health can handle anger, grief,
joy and the other emotions.
Fragments 20
Once, when [Agrippinus] was preparing for lunch, a messenger
arrived from Rome announcing that Nero had sentenced him to
exile. Unflustered he replied, ‘Then why don’t we just move our
lunch to Aricia.’
Fragments 21
So does this misfortune prevent you in any way from being just,
generous, sober, reasonable, careful, free from error, courteous, free,
etc. – all of which together make human nature complete?
Fragments 28b
We are responsible for some things, while there are others for which
we cannot be held responsible.
Enchiridion 1.1
If you have the right idea about what really belongs to you and what
does not, you will never be subject to force or hindrance, you will
never blame or criticize anyone, and everything you do will be done
willingly.
Enchiridion 1.3
So make a practice at once of saying to every strong impression:
‘An impression is all you are, not the source of the impression.’
Then test and assess it with your criteria, but one primarily: ask, ‘Is
this something that is, or is not, in my control?’
Enchiridion 1.5
The faculty of desire purports to aim at securing what you want,
while aversion purports to shield you from what you don’t. If you
fail in your desire, you are unfortunate, if you experience what you
would rather avoid you are unhappy.
Enchiridion 2.1
It is not events that disturb people, it is their judgements concerning
them.
Enchiridion 5
An ignorant person is inclined to blame others for his own
misfortune. To blame oneself is proof of progress. But the wise man
never has to blame another or himself.
Enchiridion 5
What quality belongs to you? The intelligent use of impressions. If
you use impressions as nature enchiridion prescribes, go ahead and
indulge your pride, because then you will be celebrating a quality
distinctly your own.
Enchiridion 6
Don’t hope that events will turn out the way you want, welcome
events in whichever way they happen: this is the path to peace.
Enchiridion 8
Provoked by the sight of a handsome man or a beautiful woman,
you will discover within you the contrary power of self-restraint.
Faced with pain, you will discover the power of endurance. If you
are insulted, you will discover patience. In time, you will grow to be
confident that there is not a single impression that you will not have
the moral means to tolerate.
Enchiridion 10
Under no circumstances ever say ‘I have lost something,’ only ‘I
returned it.’
Enchiridion 11
Starting with things of little value – a bit of spilled oil, a little stolen
wine – repeat to yourself: ‘For such a small price I buy tranquillity
and peace of mind.’
Enchiridion 12.2
You have to realize, it isn’t easy to keep your will in agreement with
nature, as well as externals. Caring about the one inevitably means
you are going to shortchange the other.
Enchiridion 13
Quote Source
10
Remember to act always as if you were at a symposium. When the
food or drink comes around, reach out and take some politely; if it
passes you by don’t try pulling it back. And if it has not reached you
yet, don’t let your desire run ahead of you, be patient until your turn
comes.
Enchiridion 15
Don’t let outward appearances mislead you into thinking that
someone with more prestige, power or some other distinction must
on that account be happy.
Enchiridion 19.2
Remember, it is not enough to be hit or insulted to be harmed, you
must believe that you are being harmed. If someone succeeds in
provoking you, realize that your mind is complicit in the
provocation. … Take a moment before reacting, and you will find it
is easier to maintain control.
Enchiridion 20
If you commit to philosophy, be prepared at once to be laughed at
and made the butt of many snide remarks.
Enchiridion 22
If I can make money while remaining honest, trustworthy and
dignified, show me how and I will do it. But if you expect me to
sacrifice my own values, just so you can get your hands on things
that aren’t even good – well, you can see yourself how thoughtless
and unfair you’re being.
Enchiridion 24.3
‘Well, what will my profession in the community be?’ Whatever
position you are equipped to fill, so long as you preserve the man of
trust and integrity.
Enchiridion 24.4
When somebody’s wife or child dies, to a man we all routinely say,
‘Well, that’s part of life.’ But if one of our own family is involved,
then right away it’s ‘Poor, poor me!’ We would do better to
remember how we react when a similar loss afflicts others.
Enchiridion 26
If your body was turned over to just anyone, you would doubtless
take exception. Why aren’t you ashamed that you have made your
mind vulnerable to anyone who happens to criticize you, so that it
automatically becomes confused and upset?
Enchiridion 28
‘My brother is unfair to me.’ Well then, keep up your side of the
relationship; don’t concern yourself with his behaviour, only with
what you must do to keep your will in tune with nature. Another
person will not hurt you without your cooperation; you are hurt the
moment you believe yourself to be.
Enchiridion 30
Settle on the type of person you want to be and stick to it, whether
alone or in company.
Enchiridion 33.1
When you’re called upon to speak, then speak, but never about
banalities like gladiators, horses, sports, food and drink – commonplace
stuff. Above all don’t gossip about people, praising, blaming
or comparing them.
Enchiridion 33.2
If you learn that someone is speaking ill of you, don’t try to defend
yourself against the rumours; respond instead with, ‘Yes, and he
doesn’t know the half of it, because he could have said more.’
Enchiridion 33.9
In your conversation, don’t dwell at excessive length on your own
deeds or adventures. Just because you enjoy recounting your
exploits doesn’t mean that others derive the same pleasure from
hearing about them.
Enchiridion 33.14
Take a minute and let the matter wait on you. Then reflect on both
intervals of time: the time you will have to experience the pleasure,
and the time after its enjoyment that you will beat yourself up over
it.
Enchiridion 34
As you are careful when you walk not to step on a nail or turn your
ankle, so you should take care not to do any injury to your character
at the same time.
Enchiridion 38
Whenever anyone criticizes or wrongs you, remember that they are
only doing or saying what they think is right. They cannot be guided
by your views, only their own; so if their views are wrong, they are
the ones who suffer insofar as they are misguided. I mean, if
someone declares a true conjunctive proposition to be false, the
proposition is unaffected, it is they who come off worse for having
their ignorance exposed.
Enchiridion 42
Quote Source
11
[When someone does something you don't like] Say to yourself each
time, ‘He did what he believed was right.’
Enchiridion 42
If your brother mistreats you, don’t try to come to grips with it by
dwelling on the wrong he’s done (because that approach makes it
unbearable); remind yourself that he’s your brother, that you two
grew up together; then you’ll find that you can bear it.
Enchiridion 43
The following are non-sequiturs: ‘I am richer, therefore superior to
you’; or ‘I am a better speaker, therefore a better person, than you.’
Enchiridion 44
Someone bathes in haste; don’t say he bathes badly, but in haste.
Someone drinks a lot of wine; don’t say he drinks badly, but a lot.
Until you know their reasons, how do you know that their actions
are vicious?
Enchiridion 45
The mark and attitude of the ordinary man: never look for help or
harm from yourself, only from outsiders. The mark and attitude of
the philosopher: look for help and harm exclusively from yourself.
Enchiridion 48
If I admire the interpretation [of a philosophical treatise], I have
turned into a literary critic instead of a philosopher, the only
difference being that, instead of Homer, I’m interpreting
Chrysippus.
Enchiridion 49
How long will you wait before you demand the best of yourself, and
trust reason to determine what is best?
Enchiridion 51.1
When faced with anything painful or pleasurable, anything bringing
glory or disrepute, realize that the crisis is now, that the Olympics
have started, and waiting is no longer an option; that the chance for
progress, to keep or lose, turns on the events of a single day.
Enchiridion 51.2
[on valuing theoretical over practical philosophy] The result is that
we lie – but have no difficulty proving why we shouldn’t.
Enchiridion 52.2
